[[Capital (Marx)]] part 2 chapter 4 section 3

When money turns into capital, where does its change of value occur? Not in money itself: as a means of purchase or payment, money merely realizes the prices of the commodities it buys or pays for, and when money clings to its own form, it hardens into a magnitude of value that remains the same. 39 The money’s value also can’t change in the second act of cir- culation, a commodity’s resale, because this act merely transforms a com- modity from its natural form back into the money-form. The change has to take place in the commodity that is purchased in the first act of circu- lation, M-C; yet the value of this commodity can’t change during the act of exchange, because equivalents are being exchanged: the commodity is bought at its value. So the change in the money’s value has to proceed from the commodity’s use-value as such; that is, the change has to take place when the commodity is consumed. In order to extract value from the con- sumption of a commodity, our money owner must be lucky enough to find circulating in the market a commodity whose use-value has the special characteristic of being a source of value. When this commodity is actually consumed, labor would be objectified, and thus value would be created. The money owner does in fact find just such a commodity in the market: labor- capacity or labor- power. By “labor-power” and “labor-capacity,” we mean all the capacities that exist in a person’s bodily form and living personality, and that he activates whenever he produces use-values of any kind. Various conditions have to be met before the money owner can actually find labor-power on the market as a commodity. Commodity exchange, in and for itself, doesn’t imply any relations of dependence except the ones aris- ing from its own nature. Given this, labor-power can appear in the market as a commodity only insofar as and because its owner, the person it belongs to, offers it for sale or sells it as a commodity. And if the labor-power’s owner is to sell his labor-power as a commodity, it must be fully his, something that he can do whatever he wants with. He must be the independent proprietor of his labor-capacity, of his own person.40 The owner of the labor-power and the money owner encounter each other in the market—and enter into a relation—as commodity owners of the same standing, different only in that one buys and the other sells; they are equals before the law. In order to maintain this relation, the owner of the labor-power must sell his commod- ity for a limited time only. If he sold his labor-power all at once, in one big sale, he would be selling himself, transforming himself from a free person into a slave, from a commodity owner into a commodity. Here a person must always treat his labor-power as his property, hence as his own commodity, and he can do that only insofar as he puts his labor at the buyer’s disposal temporarily—only insofar as he gives up his labor-power to be consumed for a specific time-period. He has to dispose of his labor-power without renouncing ownership of it.41 A second essential condition needs to be met before the money owner can find labor-power in the market as a commodity. The labor-power’s owner can’t sell commodities in which his labor has been objectified. Instead he has to sell as a commodity his labor-power itself, which exists only in his living body. A person obviously has to own some means of production—for exam- ple, raw materials, instruments of labor, and so on—in order to sell com- modities other than his own labor-power: he can’t make boots without leather. He also needs some means of subsisting. No one can live on the products of the future, i.e., unfinished use-values. People have to consume things every day, both before they produce and while they are producing, just as they had to on the first day they appeared on the world stage. In addition, the things that people produce as commodities have to be sold after they have been produced, and they can satisfy the wants and needs of their producers only after they have been sold. The time it takes to sell commodities has to be added to the time it takes to produce them. A money owner has to find a free worker in the commodity market— free in two senses—in order to turn money into capital. As a free person, the worker can do whatever he wants with his labor-power: he can sell it as his own commodity. Furthermore, he is otherwise commodity-free: he has none of the things he needs to realize his labor-power. The money owner finds the labor market ready-made as a particular division of the commodity market and isn’t interested in why he encoun- ters this free worker in the circulation sphere. For the moment, neither are we. We are proceeding from this fact on the level of theory, whereas the commodity owner does so on the level of practice. But one thing is clear: nature doesn’t produce money owners or commodity owners on the one side, and people who own only their labor-power on the other. This rela- tion comes from natural history just as little as it is a social relation that we find in all historical periods. Clearly, it resulted from a prior historical development: it was produced by many economic revolutions in the past, or a whole series of older formations of social production going under. The economic categories we examined earlier also carry traces of history. A product’s existence as a commodity contains, veiled within it, definite historical conditions. If a product is to become a commodity, it can’t be produced to serve its producer directly as a means of subsistence.
Let’s say that we had gone further and asked, Under what circumstances do all products, or even just the majority of them, take on the form of a commodity? We would have seen that this situation is always based on a very specific mode of production: the capitalist mode. But such a line of inquiry would take us far from an analysis of the commodity. Commodity production and commodity circulation can occur even if the vast majority of products, being slated to meet the immediate needs of their makers, aren’t turned into commodities, or where exchange-value is still a long way from reigning over all areas of the social process of production. In order for products to be fashioned as commodities, the division of labor within society has to have developed enough for use-value and exchange-value to be fully separated, a process that merely begins with direct exchange. We find this stage of development, however, in economic social formations that belong to very different historical moments. Let us now consider money, which exists only once a certain level of commodity exchange has been reached. Different forms of money—money as the commodity’s mere equivalent, money as the means of circulation, money as the means of payment, money as stores of money and worldwide money—indicate very different stages in the social process of production, according to the extent and relative preponderance of one function or the other. Nevertheless, experience shows that even relatively undeveloped commodity circulation allows all these forms to emerge. Not so with capi- tal. Its historical conditions of existence aren’t yet present in the simple cir- culation of commodities and money—far from it. Capital arises only where a person who owns some means of production and subsistence finds a free worker in the market selling his own labor-power, and this one historical condition holds within it a whole history of the world. The appearance of capital announces a new epoch in the social process of production.42 Here, then, we need to look more closely at labor-power, that special commodity. Like all other commodities, it has a value. 43 How is its value determined? As with any other commodity, the labor-time needed to produce this particular article, and thus also reproduce it, determines its value.
Labor-power, insofar as it is value, represents nothing but the particu- lar quantity of socially average labor objectified in it. Labor-power exists only as a capacity that belongs to a living individual. This individual must therefore exist in order for labor-power to be produced. So to reproduce or maintain this individual is in fact to produce labor-power. Since a living individual requires a certain amount of means of subsistence, the labor- time needed to produce labor-power equals the labor-time it takes to pro- duce these means. In other words, labor-power’s value is the value of the means of subsistence needed to maintain the labor-power’s owner. Labor- power is realized, however, only by being expressed, and it is only acti- vated in labor. When it is activated in labor, a definite quantity of human muscle, nerve, brain, and so on is expended, and this quantity has to be replaced. If more is expended, more has to be replenished. 44 If an owner of labor-power works today, he must be able to repeat the same process tomorrow with the same strength and health. Thus the total amount of means of subsistence must suffice to maintain the working individual as a working individual in his normal state. His natural wants and needs, such as nourishment, clothes, heating, housing, and so on, vary according to the climate and other natural features specific to a country. But the extent of his so-called necessary wants and needs, and his way of satisfying them, are themselves historical products, and thus they depend to a large extent on the stage of culture that his country has reached. Among other things, the conditions in which members of the class of free workers are formed also play an essential role here, since they shape the habits and living standards of those workers. 45 Moral and historical factors help to determine labor- power’s value, in contrast to what we find with all other commodities. In a given country in a given period, the average amount of the necessary means of subsistence is nevertheless a known datum. The owners of labor-power are mortal. If the person selling his labor is to appear in the market continuously, as he must when money is con- tinuously transformed into capital, he has to perpetuate himself “in the way that every living being perpetuates itself, by procreation.”46 The labor- power that wear and tear and death take from the market must always be replaced with at least as much labor-power. Thus the sum of the means of subsistence needed to produce labor-power has to include the means of subsistence for replacements: the workers’ children. That is how the members of this race of special commodity owners perpetuate themselves in the commodity market.47 A particu lar kind of training or education is needed to modify the gen- eral nature of human beings in such a way that they become skillful and deft in a particu lar branch of labor, or, in other words, become developed and specialized labor-power. This training, in turn, costs an equivalent in commodities of a greater or lesser amount. Educational costs differ according to whether the character of labor-power is mediated a little or a lot. Vanishingly small for ordinary labor-power, these costs count as part of the overall value spent to produce labor- power. Since labor-power’s value equals only the value of a certain sum of the means of subsistence, it varies with the value of those means—i.e., with the magnitude of the labor- time required to produce them. Some means of subsistence—for example, food, heating, and so on— are consumed daily and must be replaced daily. Others, such as clothes and furniture, last longer and don’t need to be replaced as often. Com- modities of one type must be bought and paid for anew every day; other types must be bought or paid for weekly, monthly, quarterly, and so on. But however the sum of these expenditures is spread out over the course of a year, an income of a certain daily average is needed to cover it. If the total amount of commodities consumed daily to produce labor- power = A, and the commodities consumed weekly = B, quarterly = C, and so on, then the daily average of these commodities will be 365xA + 52xB + 4xC + and so on, divided by 365. If we assume that six hours of social labor are embedded in the quantity of commodities needed for an average day, then half a day of socially average labor is objectified daily in labor-power. So to produce labor-power daily, half a day of labor is required. This, the quantity of labor required each day to produce labor-power, constitutes labor-power’s daily value, or the value of the labor-power reproduced daily. If half a day of socially average labor is also represented in an amount of gold worth 3 shillings or 1 thaler, then 1 thaler would be the price that corresponds to the labor-power’s daily value. If an owner of labor-power sells his com- modity for 1 thaler per day, then its price equals its value, and, according to what we assumed above, the money owner who’s so keen to transform his thalers into capital pays just that amount in value. The lower or minimum limit of labor-power’s value is the value of the commodities that the labor-power’s bearer, a human being, needs daily in order to keep renewing his life-process: the value of his physically indispens- able means of subsistence. If labor-power’s price falls to that minimum, it will have fallen below its value. Under such circumstances, labor-power can be maintained and cultivated only in a broken condition, but what deter- mines the value of every commodity is the labor-time needed to produce it with its normal level of quality. This method of determining labor- power’s value proceeds from the nature of the thing itself, and it is an extraordinarily cheap type of sentimentality that finds it harsh, whining along with Rossi, “To con- ceive labor-capacity [puissance de travail] while one abstracts from the workers’ means of subsistence during the production process is to conceive a phantom [être de raison]. Someone who says labor, or labor-capacity, is also saying the worker and his means of subsistence, the worker and his wages.” 48 But saying “labor-capacity” isn’t the same as saying “ labor,” any more than saying “the capacity for digestion” is the same as saying “digestion.” Digestion, as we know, requires more than a strong stomach—it needs food. To say “labor-capacity” isn’t to abstract from the means of subsistence needed to maintain it. The value of these means is in fact expressed through labor-capacity’s value. If a worker doesn’t sell his labor-capacity, it does nothing for him; instead he will experience as a terrible natural necessity the fact that his labor- capacity, in order to be produced, has required a certain quantity of means of subsistence, and it keeps requiring those means all over again in order to be reproduced. Like Sismondi, he will discover that “labor- capacity . . . is nothing unless it is sold.” 49,x The special nature of labor-power, that singular commodity, is such that when a seller and buyer close their contract, the buyer doesn’t actually have labor-power’s use-value in his hands. As with every other commodity, labor-power’s value is determined by the particular amount of social labor expended to produce it, and so its value is determined before it enters  into circulation. But the use-value of labor-power doesn’t come into being until its power is expressed, which happens only after it has been sold. There is a temporal gap, then, between the moment when power is parted with and the moment when it is in fact expressed, or exists as a use-value. When the moment that the use-value of a commodity is formally parted with (by being sold) and the moment that the buyer actually gets the use-value don’t coincide, 50 the buyer’s money functions most often as a means of payment. In all countries under the capitalist mode of produc- tion, labor-power isn’t paid for until after it has functioned throughout the labor period that is established by the purchase contract, for example, at the end of each week. So the worker always advances the capitalist the use- value of his labor-power. He lets the buyer consume it before the buyer pays him; in other words, the worker always lets the capitalist buy on credit. This extending of credit is no mere illusion, which we see not only when wages bought on credit are lost due to the occasional bankruptcy on the part of a capitalist, 51 but also from a series of even longer-lasting consequences. 52 Whether money functions as a means of purchase or of payment, however, has no effect on the nature of the commodity exchange itself. Labor-power’s price is contractually established, even if its price isn’t realized until afterward, as is the case when a house is rented. Labor- power has in fact been sold, even if someone pays for it only later. To gain a pure understanding of this relation, it can thus be useful to assume that the labor-power’s owner always receives the contractually stipulated price on the spot. We have seen what determines the value a money owner pays an owner of labor-power for his special commodity. In return, the money owner gets use-value that first appears during consumption, or in the process dur- ing which the labor-power is actually consumed. The money owner buys everything he needs for this process in the market, such as raw materi- als and so on, paying full price. The process whereby labor-power is con- sumed is simultaneously the process of producing a commodity and also the process of creating surplus-value. Labor-power is consumed outside the market, i.e., outside the sphere of circulation, just like every other commodity. Let’s therefore leave this noisy sphere, which resides on the surface for all to see—leave together with the money owner and the labor- power’s owner, and follow them into the hidden place of production. As we are about to enter, we will see a sign: “No admittance except on business.” xi Here we will learn not just how capital produces things, but also how capi- tal is produced. The secret of turning a profit will be revealed at last. The sphere of circulation or commodity exchange, within whose limits the movement of buying and selling labor-power occurs, is in fact a veritable Eden of innate human rights. What reigns is exclusively freedom, equality,  property, and Bentham. Freedom! Because only the free wills of the buyer and seller of a commodity, for example, labor-power, determine how these figures act. They enter into business dealings as free persons, equal before the law. The end result is the contract that represents a joint legal expression of their wills. Equality! Because they interact only as commodity owners and exchange an equivalent for an equivalent. Property! Because each owner does whatever he wants with only what is his. Bentham! Because each cares only about himself. The only force that brings the two parties together and into a relation with each other is self-concern, private interests, personal gain. And precisely because each person thus thinks only about himself and no one else, and also as the result of the preestablished harmonious order of things, or perhaps under the auspices of an infinitely shrewd Providence, their work advances nothing but mutual benefits, the common good, and collective interests. Something changes, so it seems, in the physiognomy of our drama- tis personae upon leaving this sphere of simple circulation or commodity exchange, the sphere on which the vulgar free trader bases his views, con- cepts, and the standards he uses to judge a society of capital and wage labor. The former money owner now strides ahead as a capitalist, while the owner of the labor-power follows him as his worker, one grinning self-importantly, eager to do business, the other wary and reluctant to continue, like someone who has brought his own hide to the market and now can’t expect anything other than . . . the tannery.

39. “In the form of money . . . capital is productive of no profit” (Ricardo: Princ. of Pol. Econ. p. 267) 
40. In encyclopedias of classical antiquity, one can read the following sort of nonsense: In the ancient world, capital was fully developed, “except that free workers and a credit sys- tem were missing.” Even Mr. Mommsen, in his “Roman History,” commits one quid pro quo after another. [Editor’s note: Theodor Mommsen (1817–1903) was a German historian and politician known for trying to make classical studies more rigorous or “wissenschaftlich,” which, for some of his critics (e.g., J. J. Bachofen), amounted to Prus sianizing them. In the late nineteenth century, Mommsen managed to secure millions of marks in funding from the German government to carry out vast data collection projects, sending scores of researchers into the field to produce “forensically sound” copies of Roman inscriptions. His partner in this general undertaking, the church historian Adolf Harnack, liked to call what they had set in motion “the heavy industry of scholarship.” In 1901, Mommsen won the Nobel Prize for Literature for his multivolume Roman History.] 
41. Hence legislation in different countries has established a maximum length for labor contracts. Wherever free labor obtains, laws regulate the conditions for terminating labor contracts. In some countries, especially Mexico (and before the American Civil War, in those territories that the United States had torn away from Mexico, and also, practically speaking, in the Danube principalities before Cuza’s takeover), slavery is or has been hid- den under the form of peonage. Advances to be repaid with labor, and handed down from one generation to the next, make not only individual workers, but also their families, into the property of other people and the families of those people. Juarez abolished peonage, but the so-called Emperor Maximillian reintroduced it with a decree that was accurately denounced in the United States House of Representative as a decree to reintroduce slavery in Mexico. “I can alienate . . . my particu lar physical and mental skills and active capabili- ties to someone else and allow him to use them for a limited period, because provided they are subject to this limitation, they acquire an external relationship to my totality and uni- versality. By alienating the whole of my time, as made concrete through work, and the totality of my production, I would be making the substantial quality of the latter, i.e. my univer- sal activity and actuality or my personality itself, into someone else’s property” (Hegel: “Die Philosophie des Rechts. Berlin 1840,” p. 104, §67). [Editor’s note: English translation, Elements of the Philosophy of Right, trans. H. B. Nisbet, ed. Allen W. Wood (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), p. 97. Translation modified.] 
42. Note added to the second edition: What characterizes the capitalist epoch, then, is that for the worker himself labor-power takes on the form of a commodity belonging to him, and his labor therefore takes on the form of wage labor. At the same time, it is only from this moment on that the commodity-form of labor products becomes universal. 
43. “The Value or Worth of a man, is as of all other things, his price: that is to say, so much as would be given for the use of his power.” Th. Hobbes: “Leviathan” in Works edit. Molesworth. London 1839-44, Vol. 3, p. 76.  
44. As the person who oversaw agricultural slaves in ancient Rome, the villicus, “ because his work was easier than that of the slaves,” “got less than they did” (Th. Mom- msen, Röm. Geschichte 1856, p. 810). 
45. In his work “Over-population and Its Remedy. London 1846,” W. Th. Thornton pre- sents interest ing evidence in support of this point. 
46. Petty. [Editor’s note: Marx’s source text is Petty’s work from 1691, The Political Anatomy of Ireland; the line appears to be a paraphrase.]  
47. “Its [labor’s] natural price . . . consists in such a quality of necessaries, and com- forts of life, as, from the nature of the climate, and the habits of the country, are necessary to support the labourer, and to enable him to rear such a family as may preserve, in the market, an undiminished supply of labour.” R. Torrens: “An Essay on the external Corn Trade. London 1815,” p. 62. Here Torrens makes the mistake of using the word “ labor” for labor- power. 
48. Rossi: “Cours d’Écon. Polit. Bruxelles 1843,” pp. 370, 371. [Editor’s note: Pellegrino Rossi (1787–1848), an Italian economist and politician, took over Jean-Baptiste Say’s chair in economy at the Collège de France upon the latter’s death.] 
49. Sismondi: “Nouv. Princ. etc.” part 1, p. 114.  
50. “All labour is paid, after it has ceased” (“An Inquiry into those Principles respecting the Nature of demand etc.” p. 104). “Commercial credit must have begun when the worker, the first artisan of the product, was able, by means of his savings, to wait to receive the wages for his work until the end of the week, the fortnight, the month, the quarter, etc.” (Ch. Ganilh: Des Systèms de l’Écon. Polit. 2ème ed. Paris 1821, part 1, p. 150). 
51. “The worker lends his industry”: but then Storch cleverly adds that the worker “risks nothing” but “the loss of his wages. . . . The worker transmits nothing of a material nature” (Storch: Cours d’Écon. Polit. St. Petersburg, 1815, part 2, pp. 36, 37). 
52. An example: In London, there are two kinds of bakers, the “full- priced” ones who sell bread at its full value, and the “undersellers” who sell it below that value. Members of the latter class make up more than three-quarters of all bakers. (See pp. XXXII–XXXIV in the “Report” of the government commissioner H. S. Tremenheere on the “Grievances complained of by the journeymen bakers etc. London 1862.”) Nearly all the undersellers sell bread that has been adulterated with alum, soap, pearl-ash, chalk, Derbyshire stone dust, and other similarly pleasant, nourishing, and wholesome ingredients. (See the Blue Book cited above, as well as the report of the “Committee of 1855 on the Adulteration of Bread” and Dr. Hassall’s “Adulterations Detected.” 2nd edit. London, 1861.) Speaking before the Committee of 1855, Sir John Gordon stated: “In consequence of these adulterations, the poor man, who lives on two pounds of bread per day, does not now take in one-fourth of that amount of nutrition, not to speak of the deleterious effects on his health.” [Editor’s note: More a paraphrase than a direct quotation.] To explain why “a very large proportion of the labouring class” has come to terms with alum, stone dust, and so on, even though they know about these ingredients, Tremenheere makes the point (op. cit. p. XLVIII) that for workers it is “a matter of necessity to take, from their baker, or from the chandler’s shop, whatever bread as may be offered to them.” Because the workers aren’t paid until the end of the week, “they are unable to pay for the bread consumed by their families during the week, before the end of the week,” and Tremenheere adds, citing witnesses’ statements, “It is notorious that bread composed of those mixtures, is made expressly for sale in this manner.” “In many English agricultural districts [but even more in Scotland], workers are paid every two weeks and even monthly. With this long pay period, the agricultural worker must obtain goods on credit. . . . He has to pay high prices and is practically restricted to the shop which gives him credit. Thus at Horningsham in Wilts, for example, where wages are monthly, flour costs 2s. 4d. per stone, whilst it was 1s. 10d. per stone elsewhere” (“Sixth Report” on “Public Health” by “The Medical Officer of the Privy Council etc. 1864,” p. 264). “In 1853, the block-printers of Paisley and Kilmarnock (western Scotland) obtained through a strike the reduction of the pay period from monthly to fortnightly” (“Reports of the Inspectors of Factories for 31st October 1853,” p. 34). We can see the following method, which is used by many English coal mine owners, as another deft development in the credit the worker extends to the cap i tal ist. Here the worker isn’t paid until the end of the month, and in the meantime, the capi tal ist gives him advances, often in the form of goods that he, the worker, has to buy above their market value (truck system). “It is a common practice with the coal masters to pay once a month, and advance cash to their workmen at the end of each intermediate week. The cash is given in the shop [that is, the tommy shop belong- ing to the master]; the men take it on one side and lay it out on the other” (“Children’s Employment Commission, III. Report. Lond. 1864,” p. 38, n. 192).