[[Capital (Marx)]] Part 2 chapter 4 section 2

The form of circulation where money emerges from its chrysalis as capital contradicts all the laws we have explicated up to now: those having to do with the nature of commodities, value, money, and also the nature of circu- lation itself. This other form of circulation differs from simple commodity circulation in that it reverses the order of the same two opposing processes, a sale and a purchase. By what magic does a purely formal difference trans- form the nature of these processes? And another thing: the sequence of exchange is reversed for just one of the three friends of commerce doing business together. As a capitalist, I buy a commodity from A and resell it to B, whereas as a simple com- modity owner, I sell my commodity to B and then buy a commodity from A. For the participants A and B, there is no difference between these two circuits. A and B enter into the transactions that make up the two cir- cuits only as the buyer or the seller of a commodity. I interact with them in each case as either a simple money owner or a simple commodity owner, as a buyer or a seller. And in both sequences, in fact, it is merely as a seller that I interact with the one person and merely as a buyer that I interact with the other: it is merely as money that I interact with the one person and merely as a commodity that I interact with the other. I interact with neither person as capital or as a capitalist, or as the repre- sentative of something more than money or a commodity. In neither case am I the representative of something that can exert effects other than those of money and commodities. For me, buying from A and selling to B form a sequence. But the two transactions are connected only for me—A doesn’t care about my transaction with B, and B doesn’t care about my transaction with A. If I tried to explain to A and B how I profit when the sequence is reversed, they would probably tell me that I’m confused, and that the whole transaction didn’t begin when something was bought and end when something was sold, but rather proceeded the other way around. It began when something was sold and ended when something was bought. My first act, buying, was in fact selling from A’s standpoint, and my second act, selling, was buying from B’s. Not satisfied with that, A and B would declare the whole sequence to be unnecessary, nothing more than hocus-pocus. They would say that from now on, A will be sell- ing his commodity directly to B, and B will be buying it directly from A. The whole transaction would shrink down to a one-sided act of regular commodity circulation. It would be merely a sale from A’s standpoint and merely a purchase from B’s. When we reverse the sequence, we don’t wind up beyond the sphere of simple commodity circulation. Hence we have to ask whether the nature of simple commodity circulation allows the values that go into circulation to be valorized and, thus, surplus-value to be created. Let’s examine the circulation process in a form in which it presents itself simply as an exchange of commodities. We will find this form of cir- culation wherever two commodity owners buy from each other and, when it is time to pay, owe each other offsetting amounts that come out to a balance of zero. Here, money serves as money of account. It expresses commodities’ values as their prices, but it isn’t as a physical thing that this money positions itself opposite commodities. Insofar as use-value is concerned, both participants can profit, clearly. Each disposes of a com- modity that he doesn’t need or want as a use-value, and each acquires a commodity he needs or wants to use. And this might not be the only advantage for the exchangers. A, who sells wine and buys grain, will per- haps produce more wine than the grain farmer B could produce in the same amount of labor-time, and B, for his part, will perhaps produce more grain than A could in the same amount of labor-time. Thus A might wind up with more grain for the same exchange-value, and B with more wine, than each would have if the two weren’t able to exchange goods and had to produce, respectively, their own wine and grain. With regard to use- value, one can say, “Exchange is a transaction in which both sides profit.”15 Not so with exchange-value. “A man who has a large amount of wine and no grain trades with a man who has a lot of grain and no wine, and they exchange grain worth 50 for a value of 50 in wine. The exchange results in an increase in exchange-value for neither person, because before the exchange, each already possessed a value equal to the one he acquired through the transaction.” 16 Nothing about this situation changes when money, functioning as the means of circulation, steps between the com- modities, and the acts of buying and selling commodities lose their direct physical connection. 17 Prices represent commodities’ values before com- modities begin to circulate. So prices don’t result from circulation; rather, circulation requires prices as a precondition.18 Let us now consider simple commodity circulation in the abstract. If we leave aside those conditions that don’t arise from its immanent laws, what do we see? One use-value is substituted for another, but beyond that, nothing happens except that a commodity is transformed or, in other words, it merely changes its form. The same exchange-value—the same quantity of objectified social labor—remains in the same commod- ity owner’s hands, alternately in the shape of his commodity, the shape of the money his commodity turns into, and the shape of the commodity into which the money is reverse-transformed. This form change doesn’t imply that the magnitude of value changes. The change that the com- modity’s value undergoes has to do only with its money-form. Its money- form exists at first as the price of a commodity for sale, then as a sum of actual money, which has already been expressed as the commodity’s price, and, finally, as the price of an equivalent commodity. In and for itself, this form change implies a change in a commodity’s magnitude of value just as little as the value of a £5 note is altered when one exchanges it for sovereigns, half sovereigns, or shillings. Thus insofar as commod- ity circulation requires only that value change its form, this circulation, when it proceeds in its pure form, requires that equivalents be exchanged. Vulgar economists, having no idea what value is, presume that supply and demand match each other, or that the effects of supply and demand have come to a complete stop, whenever they feel like training their own pecu- liar sights on the phenomenon of commodity circulation in its pure form. If both parties in an exchange can profit with regard to use-value, they can’t with regard to exchange-value. The rule, rather, is, “Where equality exists, there is no gain.” 19 Of course, it is possible to sell commodities at prices that deviate from their values, but such deviation presents itself as a violation of the law of commodity exchange.20 In the pure form of com- modity exchange, equivalents are exchanged. This isn’t a way for someone to enlarge their value.21 Almost always lurking behind attempts to depict commodity circulation as that which generates surplus-value is a quid pro quo: use-value is con- fused with exchange-value.v For example, Condillac writes, “It is wrong to say that in commodity exchange, we exchange value for the same value. It is the other way around. Both parties involved always give up a smaller value for a larger one. . . . In fact, if we always exchanged equal values, neither party could make a profit. But both do profit, or in any case should profit. Why? The value of things exists only as a function of our needs. Some- thing that has more value for one person will have less for another and vice versa. . . . We shouldn’t assume that we sell things that we absolutely need to consume. . . . We want to part with a thing that is useless to us as a way of acquiring a thing we need; we want to give up less in exchange for more. . . . It was natural to think that in exchange, we give up value for equal value, as long as the values of the things being exchanged are equal in terms of gold. . . . But another consideration must be taken into account as well: does each party exchange something superfluous for something he needs?”22,vi We can see not only that Condillac makes a jumbled mess of use- value and exchange-value, but also that with all the sophistication of a tod- dler, he attributes the following situation to a society with advanced com- modity production: the producer makes his own means of subsistence and puts only what he doesn’t need, superfluous products, into circulation. 23 Yet today’s political economists often repeat Condillac’s argument, especially when they want to represent the advanced form of commodity exchange, commerce, as the factor that creates surplus-value. “Commerce,” we read,  “adds value to products, for the same products in the hands of consumers are worth more than in the hands of producers, and it may strictly be con- sidered an act of production.”24,vii But you don’t pay for commodities twice, first for their use-value and then for their value. And if the buyer needs a commodity’s use-value more than the seller, the seller needs the commod- ity’s money-form more than the buyer. Why else would he sell his commod- ity? We might just as well say that the buyer performs what is “strictly” an act of production when he turns a retailer’s stockings into money. When people exchange commodities—or commodities and money— that have the same exchange-value, which is to say, when they exchange equivalents, it is obvious that no one takes more value out of circulation than he puts into it. No surplus-value is created. But it is the pure form of commodity circulation that requires the exchange of equivalents, and in reality, things don’t happen in a pure way. Let’s therefore assume that nonequivalents are exchanged. When a commodity owner comes to the commodity market, he encounters only another commodity owner, and the power these two people exercise over each other is merely the power of their commodi- ties. The material differences among commodities constitute the material motivation for exchange. These differences make the commodity owners dependent on each other. Neither has in his hands an object that satisfies one of his own wants or needs, while both have in their hands an object that satisfies one of the other person’s wants or needs. Beyond this mate- rial difference between commodities’ use-values, there is just one other difference between commodities—the difference between their natural form and their transformed form, between commodities and money. Com- modity owners differ only in regard to whether they sell commodities they own or buy commodities with money they own. Let’s now imagine that a seller enjoys an inexplicable privilege: he gets to sell his commodity for more than its value—for £110 when it is worth £100, and thus with a nominal price increase of 10%. The seller thus col- lects £10 in surplus-value. But after being a seller, he becomes a buyer. He now faces a third commodity owner who is acting as a seller, and this seller, too, gets to sell his commodity at a price that is too high by 10%. As a seller, our man made a profit of £10, only to take a loss of £10 as a buyer. 25 What the whole thing amounts to is that all commodity owners will sell their commodities for 10% more than they are worth, which is no differ- ent from all commodity owners selling their commodities at their value. When we give all commodities a nominal price increase of 10%, this cre- ates the same effect as assessing all commodity values in silver instead of gold. The money names would grow larger—in other words, commodities’ prices would rise, but their ratios of value would remain the same. Let us now assume the reverse. The buyer has the privilege of buying commodities below their value. Here we don’t need to be reminded that the buyer will become a seller again. He was a seller before he became a buyer, so he loses 10% as a seller before he gains 10% as a buyer. 26 All remains as before. So one can’t explain how surplus-value is created, or how money is turned into capital, by assuming that sellers can sell commodities above their value or that buyers get to buy them below their value.27 If we smuggle irrelevant factors into our analysis, this will do noth- ing to simplify matters. Colonel Torrens, for example, says, “Effectual demand consists in the power and inclination [!], on the part of consum- ers, to give for commodities, either by immediate or circuitous barter, some greater portion of all the ingredients of capital than their produc- tion costs.” 28,viii In circulation, producers and consumers interact only as sellers and buyers. To assert that the surplus-value going to the producer is created when consumers pay more for commodities than they’re worth is merely to disguise the simple sentence: the commodity owner gets to sell commodities at prices that are too high. The seller has produced the commodities himself or serves as a proxy for the producers, but the buyer, too, has either produced the commodities represented in his money or is serving as a proxy for the people who produced them. A producer faces a producer. What distinguishes the two is that the one buys whereas the other sells. If a commodity owner sells his commodity for more than its value under the name “producer,” and pays too much for commodities under the name “consumer,” we still won’t get any farther in our analysis, not even an inch. 29 Those who consistently advance the misguided theory that surplus- value results from a nominal price increase, or from a seller’s privilege to sell his commodities for more than they’re worth, thus assume that there is a class of people who buy but don’t sell, who, in other words, consume but don’t produce. From the standpoint our analysis has reached, that of simple circulation, we can’t yet explain how such a class could exist. But let’s jump ahead. The money that this class of people buy with must constantly flow to them from the commodity owners themselves without exchange—the money must be free, by might or by right. To sell such people commodi- ties for more than their value would merely be to swindle back some of the money that was given away.30 The cities of Asia Minor paid an annual tribute of money to ancient Rome; with that money, the Romans bought their commodities at inflated prices. The people of Asia Minor fleeced the Romans, taking the route of trade to con back from their conquerors part of a yearly tribute. Yet the people of Asia Minor were still the ones being taken advantage of. The money they were paid for their commodities was their own money, after all. That isn’t the way to become rich or generate surplus- value. We will therefore stay within the limits of commodity exchange, where sellers are also buyers, and buyers are also sellers. Perhaps our difficulty stems from how we have been conceiving of the persons involved, namely, as mere personified categories rather than as individual people. Commodity owner A is crafty enough to fool two of his colleagues, B and C; despite their best efforts, they are unable to return the favor. Owner A sells wine worth £40 to B and in exchange acquires grain worth £50. He has transformed his £40 into £50; he has made less money into more, turning his commodity into capital. But what exactly has happened here? Before the exchange, there was £40 worth of wine in A’s hands and £50 worth of grain in B’s, a total value of £90. After the exchange, the total is the same. The value circulating hasn’t grown by even an atom. All that has changed is how the £90 is distributed between A and B. What registers as surplus-value on the one side registers as negative value on the other; what registers as a plus on one side registers as a minus on the other. The same change would occur if A stole £10 from B outright, although the form of exchange conceals this fact. Clearly, the sum of circulating value can’t be increased by changing how it is distributed— just as a Jew can’t increase the amount of precious metal in a country by selling a farthing from the time of Queen Anne for a guinea. Taken as a whole, the capitalist class in a country can’t cheat itself. 31 The outcome will remain the same however much one twists or tugs. When equivalents are exchanged, no surplus-value is generated, and when nonequivalents are exchanged, it still isn’t generated. 32 Circulation or commodity exchange does not create value.33 This, of course, is why our analysis of capital’s elementary form hasn’t yet said anything about merchant capital and usury capital, those famous and, so to speak, antediluvian forms of capital, and has instead focused on the form that capital has when it determines the economic organization of modern society. The M-C-M′ form, buying in order to sell at a higher price, finds its purest expression in true merchant capital. But the movement of M- C-M′ occurs entirely within the circulation sphere, and because it is impossible from the standpoint of circulation to explain how money is transformed into capital—i.e., how surplus-value is created—merchant capital looks impossible as long as equivalents are exchanged.34 Thus merchant capital appears to be something that takes place only when a merchant parasiti- cally inserts himself between commodity owners who are buying and selling in order to bilk both of them. This is what Benjamin Franklin had in mind when he said, “War is robbery, commerce is cheating.”35 If we don’t want to think that merchant capital is valorized only when commodity owners are defrauded, we would need to take into account a long series of mediating factors; and here, at a point where we are presupposing only commodity circulation and its simple components, these factors are entirely absent. What holds for merchant capital applies even more to usury capital. In merchant capital, the starting point and the endpoint—namely, the money put into the market and the greater amount taken out—are at least medi- ated by a purchase and a sale, or the movement of circulation. In usury capital, the form M-C-M′ is shortened to the unmediated starting point and endpoint M-M′: money that is exchanged for more money, a form that contradicts the nature of money and thus can’t be explained from the standpoint of commodity circulation. Hence Aristotle says, “There are two kinds of chrematistics. One has to do with commerce, the other with household management. The latter is necessary and commendable, but the kind that has to do with exchange is justly disparaged, since it is not natu- ral but is from one another. Hence usury is very justifiably detested, since it gets wealth from money itself, rather than from the very thing money was devised to facilitate. For money was introduced to facilitate exchange, but interest makes money itself grow bigger. (That is how it gets its name [τόκος, ‘interest’ and ‘offspring’]; for offspring resemble their parents, and interest is money that comes from money.) Hence of all the kinds of chre- matistics this one is the most unnatural.”36 Later, we will see that like merchant capital, interest-bearing capital is a derivative form, and we will also see why they emerged earlier than the modern elementary form of capital. Our analysis has shown that surplus- value can’t arise from circulation, that when surplus-value is created, something has to go on behind circu- lation’s back—something that can’t be seen in circulation itself. 37 But can the tr a nsfor m ation of money in to ca pita l [ 139 ] surplus-value arise anywhere besides the circulation sphere? Circulation is the sum of all the mutual relations among commodity owners. Outside the circulation sphere, an individual commodity owner has just one rela- tion left: his relation with his own commodity. With regard to the value of his commodity, this relation is limited to the fact that his commodity contains a quantity of his own labor measured according to definite social laws. This quantity is expressed as the commodity’s magnitude of value, and because its magnitude of value is represented as money of account, it is expressed as a price: say, £10. But the owner’s labor isn’t represented in the commodity’s value and a surplus beyond that value, as a price of £10 that is at the same time a price of £11—or, in other words, in a value that is greater than itself. The commodity owner’s labor can create values but not self-valorizing values. His labor can enlarge a commodity’s value: adding new labor, he can supplement existing value with new value for example, making boots from leather. The same material now has more value because it contains a greater quantity of labor. The boots have more value than the leather, but the leather’s value remains what it was. It didn’t valorize itself; it didn’t take on surplus-value as the boots were being produced. Outside the circulation sphere, the commodity owner can’t valorize his value without coming into contact with other commodity owners, and so he can’t trans- form either money or a commodity into capital. Capital, then, can’t arise within circulation just as it can’t arise outside circulation. It has to both arise and not arise there. Our analysis has thus yielded a double result. How money is transformed into capital has to be explicated on the basis of the immanent laws of commodity exchange. That equivalents are exchanged therefore has to be our starting point.38 Our money owner, still a capitalist in larval form, has to buy commodities at their value and sell them at their value, yet in the end extract more value from the process than he put into it. He must, and can’t, metamorphose into a butterfly in the circulation sphere. This is what we are up against. Hic Rhodus, hic salta! ix

15. “An exchange is an admirable transaction in which both contracting parties profit— always [!]” (Destutt de Tracy, Traité de la Volonté et de ses effets. Paris 1826, p. 68). This work appeared in 1823 as “Traité de l’Ec. Pol.” 
16. Mercier de la Rivière op. cit. p. 544. 
17. “Whether one of these two values is money, or whether they are both common com- modities: nothing could be more indifferent” (Mercier de la Riveiere op. cit. p. 543). 
18. “It is not the contracting parties who decide on the value; it is decided prior to the agreement” (Le Trosne p. 906). [Editor’s note: The source is Le Trosne op. cit.] 
19. “Where there is equality there is not profit” (Galiani: Della Moneta in Custodi, Parte Moderna, Vol. IV, p. 244)
20. “The exchange becomes disadvantageous for one of the parties when some external circumstance diminishes or inflates the price: equality is then injured, but the injury comes from this cause and not from the exchange itself ” (Le Trosne op. cit. p. 904). 
21. “An exchange is, by its very nature, a contract of equality, made on the basis of equal value for equal value. It is therefore not a means of enriching oneself, since one gives as much as one receives ” (Le Trosne op. cit. pp. 903, 904). 
22. Condillac: “Le Commerce et le Gouvernement” (1776). Edit. Daire and Molinari in the “Mélanges d’Économique. Paris, 1847,” pp. 267, 291. 
23. Le Trosne is thus quite correct when he replies to his friend Condillac: “In a devel- oped society, there is absolutely nothing that is superfluous.” At the same time, he teases Condillac with the statement: “If both parties in the exchange receive more in return for an equal amount, and part with less in return for an equal amount, they both get the same amount.” Because Condillac doesn’t yet have the slightest idea about the nature of exchange-value, he is the right person to vouch for Herr Prof. Wilhelm Roscher’s childish ideas. See Roscher’s “Die Grundlagen der Nationalökonomie. Dritte Auflage. 1858.” 
24. S. P. Newman: Elements of Polit. Econ. Andover and New York 1835, p. 175. 
25. “By the augmentation of the nominal value of the produce . . . sellers are not enriched . . . since what they gain as sellers, they precisely expend in the quality of buyers” (“The Essential Principles of the Wealth of Nations etc. London 1797,” p. 66).  
26. “If a person were made to sell a given amount of some product for 18 livres when it is worth 24 livres, then if that person were to spend 18 livres as a buyer, he would purchase an amount of product that would otherwise cost 24 livres” (Le Trosne op. cit. p. 897). 
27. “Each seller thus succeeds in generally increasing the prices of his commodities only by also submitting to paying generally more for the commodities of other sellers; and for the same reason, each consumer can generally pay less for what he purchases only by also submitting to a similar reduction in the prices of the things he sells” (Mercier de la Rivière op. cit. p. 555). 
28. R. Torrens: “An Essay on the Production of Wealth.” London 1821, p. 349.  
29. “The idea of profits being paid by consumers, is, assuredly, very absurd. Who are the consumers?” (G. Ramsey: An Essay on the Distribution of Wealth. Edinburgh 1836, p. 183). 
30. “When a man is in want of demand, does Mr. Malthus recommend him to pay some other person to take off his goods?” an indignant Ricardian asked Malthus, who, like his student the pastor Chalmers, celebrated the economic activity of the class of mere buyers and consumers. See: “An Inquiry into those principles respecting the Nature of Demand and the Necessity of Consumption, lately advocated by Mr. Malthus” etc. London 1821, p. 55  
31. Destutt de Tracy, despite, or perhaps because, he was a Membre de l’Institut, held the opposite view. He asserted that industrial capitalists make their profits in that they “sell all the products that they make—and that they sell, first of all, to one another—for more than it costs to make them” (op. cit. p. 239). [Editor’s note: In 1793, the French govern- ment founded the Institut de France to “promote the arts and sciences.” It still serves as the umbrella organization for France’s most prestigious cultural academies.] 
32. “The exchange of two equal values neither increases nor decreases the amount of the values subsisting in society. Nor does the exchange of two unequal values . . . change the sum of social values, although it adds to the fortune of one what it takes away from the fortune of the other” (J. B. Say op. cit. part 2, pp. 443–44). Say, naturally untroubled by the implications of this claim, borrowed it word for word from the Physiocrats. The following example illustrates how he sacked their writings, which were unknown during his day, and used them to increase his own “value.” Monsieur Say’s most “celebrated” line, “Products are bought only with products,” reads in the Physiocratic original, “Products are paid for only with products” (Le Trosne op. cit. 899). 
33. “Exchange confers no value at all upon products” (F. Wayland, The Elements of Pol. Econ. Boston 1843, p. 169). 
34. “Under the rule of invariable equivalents commerce would be impossible” (G. Opdyke, A Treatise on Political Economy. New-York 1851, p. 67). “The difference between  real value and exchange-value is based on one fact—namely, that the value of a thing dif- fers from the so-called equivalent given for it in trade, that is, that this equivalent is not an equivalent” (F. Engels op. cit. pp. 95, 96). [Editor’s note: English translation, p. 427.] 
35. Benjamin Franklin, Works, Vol. II, edit. Sparks in: “Positions to be examined con- cerning National Wealth.” 
36. Arist. op. cit. c. 10. [Editor’s note: 158a39-b8. English translation, pp. 18–19, modified slightly.] 
37. “Profit, in the usual condition of the market, is not made by exchanging. Had it not existed before, neither could it after that transaction” (Ramsay op. cit. p. 184).  
38. From the foregoing discussion, the reader will see that this simply means it must be pos si ble for capital to form even when the prices of commodities are equal to their value, and the formation of capital cannot be explained as resulting from the nonalignment of those two things. If prices do in fact deviate from values, we must first reduce them to the latter—that is, we must disregard the deviation as something accidental, in order to exam- ine the phenomenon of capital formation in its pure form and avoid being thrown off in our observations by muddying circumstances that aren’t relevant to the workings of the actual process at issue. Moreover, we know that this reduction isn’t simply a scholarly or scientific operation. The constant oscillations in market prices, their rising and falling, cancel or bal- ance out one another, and in effect reduce those prices to an average that is their internal regulator. This regulator constitutes the lodestar of all the merchants or industrialists in every undertaking of significant duration. They know that when a long period of time is taken as a whole, commodities will be sold neither under nor over their average price but rather for their average price. So if disinterested thinking were in the capitalist’s interest, he would have to pose the question of capital formation as follows: Where does capital come from, given that prices are regulated by average prices—or, ultimately, by the value of com- modities? I say “ultimately” because average prices don’t coincide directly with commodi- ties’ magnitudes of value, in contrast to what Smith, Ricardo, and so on believed.